# Programming-Assignment-Getting-and-Cleaning-Data
 The purpose of this programming assignment is to demonstrate my ability to collect, work with, and clean a data set. The goal is to prepare tidy data that can be used for later analysis. 


# GitHub repository contents
This GitHub repository contains the following files:

- run_analysis.R: Main R script that performs all the data cleaning steps as required by the course.
- Tidydata.txt: The tidy dataset output generated by the script. It contains the average of each variable for each activity and subject id.
- README.md: This file, explaining the purpose of the repository and how to use the files.
- CodeBook.md: A codebook describing the dataset, variables, and the transformations performed.

# How to run the R script
- Download the data: original data set from: https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip
- Unzip the contents and place the folder UCI HAR Dataset in your R working directory.
- Run the Script: Open R or RStudio and run the run_analysis.R script. This script will read the data, perform the necessary transformations, and generate the tidy_data.txt file with the tidy data set.
  
# R script called run_analysis.R: does the following steps. 
STEP 1 - Merging the training and the test sets to create one data set.
- 1.1 Read training and test tables
- 1.2 Read feature and activity labels
- 1.3 Assign column names 
- 1.4 Check dimensions and merge data

STEP 2 -  Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
- 2.1 Locate columns with "-mean()" or "-std()" 
- 2.2 Subset of data of mean and std for each measurements

STEP 3 - Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set

STEP 4 - Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 

STEP 5 - From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.
- 5.1 Create tidy data set
- 5.2 Write tidy data set to text file


